[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Say you're walking
through the park one day.
It's a beautiful summer's day.
You're feeling wonderful.
Then a Pit Bull breaks
loose from its owner.
Rushes over to you
with mouth open,
fangs dripping with
saliva, just barking.
Suddenly, your whole day shifts.
You move into fight or flight.
And you're going to react to
this threat from the outside.
So your body is translating
this external stimulus
of the Pit Bull into internal
biochemical molecular
messengers.
And those are going
throughout your whole body.
And they're pushing you into
stress, not in 20 seconds.
Those genes wreak
peak expression
in under three seconds.
So now, your body's
flooded with adrenaline,
flooded with cortisol
very, very quickly.
And you're then
responding to that threat.
That's the way the stress
response is meant to work.
Our ancestors survived
because they had a hair
trigger stress response.
And in any ancient
tribe 500,000 years ago,
those people with the
best stress response,
with the best ability to
make lots of adrenaline,
those people lived,
which was perfect
when there were tigers and
mastodons and all kinds
of predators around us.
Now, the worst predator we
have is our own thoughts.
Now, I go back home.
The Pit Bull event
is five hours old.
I didn't get injured.
Nothing bad happened.
And now, I'm telling
the story to my child.
And I'm getting upset.
I can feel my
heart racing faster
as I think about the Pit Bull.
My face is flushing.
I'm having the same
stress response
in response to my own
thinking and emotion
as I had to the Pit Bull.
If we do that over and over
and over again, if we retell
the sad tragic
story of our past,
if we stay stuck
in our childhood
traumas and the unresolved
issues of our past,
if we remain there over
and over and over again,
it has a terrible
effect on our bodies.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When we say thought
or emotion, we
think of something
insubstantial, intangible.
And yet, our
thoughts and emotions
are driving changes
in our bodies,
changes in the world around
us every single moment,
every single thought.
The way I would conceptualize it
is that thoughts are transient,
but beliefs are long-term.
And a belief is a
pattern of thought.
So you might have
a fleeting thought.
But if you think that thought
over and over and over again,
just say, for example, a thought
of self-criticism, or something
you don't like about
the world, or blame
you had with somebody
else or a big system,
like a government
or a corporation.
All of those thoughts, if
you hold them consistently,
can solidify into fixed
beliefs and a worldview.
And so, for example,
you might initially
have a sense of things not
being good in your life.
May have had
adverse experiences.
And then that may
develop into a belief
that the world is
an unsafe place.
Now, you're driving high
cortisol, high adrenaline.
You're triggering
gene expression
and a whole cascade
of biological events
with that belief.
If you then add emotion
and believe that strongly,
where you're passionate
about your belief,
now you're adding
fuel to the fire.
And that's where you'll
see a big increase
in gene expression, big
increase in those stress
hormones like
adrenaline and cortisol,
and emotion is adding
fuel to that process.
If you think that thought
persistently day after day
after day, if it's a belief,
becomes a world view,
and you have
emotion with it, now
you're raising
your cortisol level
over and over and over again.
So high cortisol over time leads
to reduced muscle mass, reduced
bone density, increased
skin wrinkling,
degradation of digestion.
All of these things start
to be affected negatively
by those thoughts
held for a long time.
People under high stress
have high cortisol.
Eventually cortisol
literally begins
to calcify the memory and
learning centers in your brain.
Your hippocampus can get
calcium deposits on it
if you have high
cortisol over time.
Now, you want calcium
in your bones and teeth
and places like that.
You do not want calcium
forming in your hippocampus,
your memory learning center.
But that's exactly what happens
in stressed people over time.
So now, your mind, your
consciousness fueled by emotion
is producing substantial
changes in your brain.
The software of mind is turning
into the hardware of brain.
And now, you have a different
brain affected by stress.
>> The body itself is energy.
And so if you magnify your
hand a million times or more,
eventually you're face
to face with an atom.
And you realize if you look
in the atom there's really
nothing in there, just
empty space, right?
And some infinitesimally
tiny energies
that are zipping around
at the speed of light.
And that's what we are.
When you're
experiencing emotions,
you see, what we believe
is that every emotion has
its own specific frequency.
And if you're feeling an
emotion of anger, for example,
that's a different frequency
or a different vibration
than an emotion of sadness.
And that's different
from frustration.
They're all different.
But if you're feeling an
emotion that's powerful enough,
your whole being can
take on this vibration.
And in those circumstances,
what can happen
is the energy of that emotion
can become just too much
for the body to take.
And so some of that
energy remains behind.
There's a process that
we go through when
we experience emotions.
The emotion is generated by the
organs and some of the glands.
And so in other words,
what's generated
is the emotional frequency that
we perceive as the emotion.
The emotion is generated.
We feel the emotion.
We acknowledge it.
And then we allow it to
dissipate and move on.
And that's the process that
we are supposed to go through.
If that process is
interrupted somewhere,
if we either bury that
emotion and we don't allow
it to surface, or if that
emotion is just so big that we
can't really deal with it,
then the energy of that emotion
remains in the body.
And so then what happens is it
may manifest many, many years
down the road as all kinds
of different problems.
The operative word that
we use is discomfort.
If you have some
kind of discomfort,
that's probably
emotionally based.
Now, discomfort can be physical
or mental or emotional.
>> But if you meditate,
if you do EFT tapping,
if you spend time in nature,
if you're in your heart,
if you spend time
with loved ones,
you have rich social networks,
all of these things go
into reverse.
Now, you're not making
lots of cortisol.
You're making lots of DHEA
and other positive hormones.
And DHEA is also called
the youthing hormone.
So now, with high levels of
DHEA, all those aging signs,
all those physical
things go into reverse.
A happy person has high
DHEA, high oxytocin.
Oxytocin then sparks the
production of neurochemicals,
like anandamide, the bliss
molecule, in your brain.
Like nitric oxide, which
makes you alert in your life.
All these positive
things happen when
you are a positive thinker,
when you meditate, when you tap.
When you do all these practices
that center you and give you
a positive affect mood outlook.
So now, thought, consciousness
fueled by positive emotion
is becoming vibrant health.
And that's the direction
you want to nudge yourself
in with every thought.
People think their
thoughts are innocuous.
They think they're
insubstantial.
But they're affecting your
body every single moment.
If you knew the harm
it did to your body,
you would do your utmost to
quit that negative thinking
immediately.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> January 6, 1985, I was
home for Christmas break from
university.
There were two friends
in high school.
It was Sunday night.
And like everybody,
we were kids,
and we were just out
having a couple beers.
I remember walking to the car.
And the other passenger, Mike,
we fought to ride shotgun.
I was riding shotgun.
I was a bad-ass, so I
didn't put my seat belt on.
It had just started raining.
The first 30 minutes of
rain, all the oil comes up.
It was the worst
conditions possible.
There was an
interaction between Mike
in the back seat and the driver.
And something happened where the
driver lost control of the car.
The driver hit the
brakes, went into a skid,
and then hit a guardrail.
It blew the engine
through my seat
and out the back of the car.
My face was blown off
my head, and my femur
was shattered into 200 pieces.
Normally, when some
of the bone pierces
the femoral artery, and you
bleed out within 50 seconds.
The car was on fire.
I was in a lot of pain,
screaming don't let me die.
I didn't want to die.
A doctor was called in.
He was called in
to amputate my leg.
He said, I just
read this article.
A Swiss doctor named [? Zicle ?]
has this contraption.
I'm not going to amputate.
I'm going to put him in traction
and put him back together.
[BEEPING]
I would go out for years
after the car accident.
And people would say, hey, how'd
you get that scar on your face.
Or it would be like I'd
be out at some place,
or even, I'll never
forget it, some woman
came up to me at a bar once.
She said, what
happened to your face?
You know?
And people-- and I
meet them all time,
people who have facial scars.
It's very traumatizing
because, you know,
that's your facade to the world.
You're like, this
is your person.
And mine was-- it took
five different surgeries
to put it back together so that
I have some kind of semblance
of a normal smile.
For 25 years, I had
this vengeance fantasy
of going to find this driver
and doing to his face what
happened to mine.
And I would find myself
in the middle of the night
sometimes just having
these horrible, you know,
like the world is unjust, and
this whole terrible thing.
Fred Luskin, who wrote
"Forgive For Good",
he was speaking
about these topics.
So one night, I wrote a letter
to the driver of the car.
And I just put it away.
I didn't mean to
send it or anything.
And then I woke up the next
morning, and I read it.
And I was just like let me check
out what's on the internet.
So I googled him and
found them on Facebook.
And I set up a second
Ira Israel account
so he would see
it's me, but I just
didn't want him to see my
whole life or anything.
And I sent the letter.
You know, I just told them what
I'd done for those 25 years.
And you know, things I
was feeling and whatnot.
And I went to work.
And I came home.
It was probably
like 6:00 at night.
And I was like, OK, let me check
this other Facebook account.
And lo and behold, I received
an equally long letter.
And I started to read it.
And it was really heartfelt.
And it's surprising
to everybody when
you show up in a certain
way, like I can't
tell you be vulnerable, right?
But if I show up
in a certain way,
I can inspire you or enroll you.
So I don't know how much
personal work this person
had done over the past
25 years or something.
But he showed up
like a gentleman.
And we went back and forth for
a week, talking about our lives.
And at the end of the week, he
had told me how sorry he was.
And for some reason,
I just felt compelled.
And I just wrote
in all capitals,
if it helps you in any
way, I forgive you.
And I deleted the account.
And I never had any of those
machinations or anything,
like, all the
negativity, you know?
And that's why I talk about this
irony cause your mind was built
to create resentments-- woulda,
coulda, shoulda, didn't.
And those are the
things that show up
as the causes of suffering
because, you know,
you're trying to change
the unchangeable.
I can't go back to 1985.
And if I did, something worse
might have happened, right?
But your mind is this incredible
machine that looks at the past
and says, wow, that
was really traumatic.
I'm never going to
let that happen again.
I'm going to lift weights,
or I'm going to get rich.
Or I'll show them.
And you do this
whole crazy thing.
You're only causing
your own suffering
because it's like trying to jam
a square peg into round hole.
You can't change the past.
And yet, if you're out
there, and you're like, well,
I'll show them that they
shouldn't have mistreated me
because I'll be famous.
And I'll be rich.
And I'll do these things.
You'll get there.
And then you'll realize
that those people--
you don't exist to them.
So you've lived your whole life
for this inauthentic reason.
>> As men, especially
in the West,
we're taught to
suppress our emotions.
Boys don't cry.
Men especially don't cry.
We're taught that emotions
and showing emotion
is a sign of weakness.
And so we tend to
suppress those emotions.
And as a result,
women are much more
likely to seek help for
emotional difficulties,
while men are much less likely.
And so as a result,
men tend to have
more problems, more diseases
and so on in certain categories.
What I have seen personally
with emotional baggage
is that they seem to be the
biggest single underlying cause
of depression and anxiety
and phobias and panic attacks
and PTSD and eating disorders
and self-sabotage of all kinds.
And they also are the
biggest underlying cause
of the physical pain
that people experience--
neck pain, migraine headaches,
low back pain, knee pain.
But other problems too.
People seek medical help for
many other kinds of conditions.
And in my experience
over the last 30 years,
every single one of
those conditions,
things like infertility and
asthma and digestive disorders,
and even cancer, all of those
diseases, in my experience,
always have an underlying
emotional component.
>> I always would
say, kind of proudly,
I was almost killed
in a car accident.
You know?
So for about 25
years, until I started
getting more and more into
compassion and Buddhism
and things like that.
And finally, I took
a course, and you had
to tell the story of your life.
And someone said, you know,
OK, what happened here?
And I said I was almost
killed in a car accident.
And there was a
gentleman who was tasked
with deconstructing the story.
And so I say I was almost
killed in a car accident.
He goes, no, you weren't.
I said, well, actually,
my femur were shattered.
My face is blown off my head.
They didn't notify my
parents because they didn't
think I was going to live.
Trust me, I was almost
killed in a car accident.
He goes, no, you weren't.
We went back and forth.
And then, finally, he says
there was a car accident.
Everything else you added.
You can't be almost pregnant.
You can't be almost dead.
You're either alive or dead.
There was a car accident.
So language creates reality.
The way you choose
to frame your life,
and you're either the
hero of your story,
or you're the victim.
And for those first 25 years,
I realized in that instant
that I was sucking
people into my drama.
Trying to get them
to be empathetic.
And I just made a
conscious choice, like, no.
So when people ask me now, it's
like, there was a car accident.
[SIRENS]
>> You know, when we look at
trauma and different traumatic
experiences, I like to
think of it as an empty cup.
So you've got a water glass.
And something happens to you
when you're two years old.
And you pour a little
bit of water in.
And that's a little
bit of trauma.
And then five years and
10 years, then a horrible
experience.
Eventually, the cup overflows.
It's too much for
the body to handle.
That's why some people can
have one traumatic experience.
And they can change from it.
They can grow from it.
There's post-traumatic
growth as a thing.
And other people, a
soldier comes back
from war dealing with PTSD,
his nervous system, his body,
his brain, his spirit is
just completely overwhelmed.
>> There are two
kinds of trauma.
There is simple trauma.
And there's complex trauma.
And complex trauma is
usually developmental trauma.
So an example of simple trauma
is somebody is 25 years old.
They have a terrible car crash.
And they're in hospital
for a long time.
It takes them a
great many months
to regain physical function.
And this shatters their lives
in some fundamental way.
That's a simple trauma.
A complex trauma is one
where there was abuse,
often as a child.
And if there's
developed mental trauma
where you were beaten over and
over and over again, or where
you were being
neglected, whether you
were being physically
assaulted, and it was repeated.
And that's a different
kind of trauma
because the brain is growing
while that trauma is happening.
And that information is
being installed at the level
of circuits in your brain.
It's not just a thought
or a belief or one event.
It is crucial.
It is fundamental to the actual
way your brain wired together.
For the first two years of
life, the fastest growing brain
region is the limbic system.
So the limbic system,
the emotional midbrain,
is the fastest
growing brain region.
It's not a part of the
brain that has language,
but it feels.
It feels deeply.
And so if you're
being traumatized
while that part of
your brain is growing,
then trauma is woven into
the neural fabric of the way
your brain structure is.
And so that kind of
trauma is hard to treat.
We find in trauma
treatment manuals
and approaches that simple
trauma is relatively easy,
but developmental
trauma, complex trauma
is hard to treat.
So how does that
person get through it?
And you can't easily get through
it using cognitive techniques,
using thought or
language-based therapies.
I can't sit you
in a chair and say
you shouldn't feel
that way because it's
fundamental to the way
your brain functions.
>> I grew up in a
really beautiful family.
My parents would hang out
with this other couple.
And this man, I was
told to call uncle.
We would go to my uncle's house.
They would all have
some type of party,
like drink a lot of beer.
And there were
like rowdy nights.
And I would in the back bed.
And he would come in.
It had happened so
many times, and then I
would fall back asleep.
I believe that it was happening
before I could even talk.
There was a level of
unawareness from my parents
that it was happening.
The very first memory that
actually came up for me
was kind of the bookend
of when it stopped.
I must have been five years old.
And I remember standing
off and being like,
you're not coming in anymore.
And I was just like
wanting to stop it.
And really feeling like I've
got to stand up for myself.
And there were times
when I even tried
to tell my auntie about it.
And they shut me down.
I never spoke to
anyone about it.
And I just got really
bottled down more and more.
Obviously, that's
overwhelming for a child,
so you block it out
and you numb it.
And you forget about it.
15 years passed, and when I
hit my late teens, early 20s,
I went into drugs,
a lot of escapism.
Didn't want to be
with my thoughts.
with my emotions.
And really run my body down.
I was having anxiety attacks.
I was really overwhelmed.
And it got to a peak time where
I started actually smashing
the window above my
bed to try to escape
in the middle of
the night thinking
that there was an
intruder coming in.
It was like, what is going
on in my subconscious?
I didn't start
uncovering my trauma
until I was probably
19 years old
after being on a massive
level of escapism on drugs.
So at that point, not only did
I have to clear the trauma,
but I had to clear
all of the drug abuse
that was on top of the trauma.
So I went into so
many modalities
to take care of
my physical body,
such as juicing and cleansing.
And then, obviously, when you
do that, more emotions come up.
So I discovered
meditation, yoga.
I became a Reiki practitioner.
I studied energy healing.
I pretty much read every
book that I could find.
All of these methods allowed
me to drop in and recognize
who I was and to let go of the
story that was controlling me.
And when you have a
lot of health issues
that are caused by
drugs, that's affecting
your psychology, that's
making you feel sick,
there's like detox going on.
And it's very easy for the
mind to identify with that
and say, oh, that's who I am.
I feel like that
earlier time in my life,
yes, any escapism is
seeking to find love.
It's seeking to have
that connection.
It's seeking to feel
held and embraced.
And so it does give you that.
And so that's the
beautiful part about it.
But in that time in my life,
I was getting those feelings,
but I also wasn't doing
the inner work with them.
I was combining it with
alcohol and smoking.
And my mind set wasn't
about looking within.
It was about partying and
not thinking about it.
And yeah, it was a hard
process to go through
to even recognize, like,
oh, did this really happen?
Like, I haven't remembered this.
And now, all of a
sudden, but I could feel
it being released in my body.
And the intense emotion
that was coming out
of me when I was healing, I was
like, you can't make this up.
And I think that's what
happens to a lot of people
who have blocked out trauma,
especially sexual abuse
because I work with
a lot of women,
even men who have had
sexual abuse earlier on.
And they've numbed it out.
Oftentimes, they think
they're making it up,
or how could this be true.
But if there's emotion
running through your system
while you're processing it, you
know there's something there.
>> When something
happens to you,
and you feel an
emotion coming up,
that's really a message
from your deep subconscious.
Now, that message
that's coming up
is happening not only because of
what's going on in the moment,
but it's also coming up
because of past experience.
This phenomenon of trapped
emotions is really universal.
If you're having any
kind of discomfort,
that's a sign of
emotional baggage.
If you're having physical
discomfort in some way,
there's something that
doesn't feel right
in your body, 99 times
out of 100 there will be
some emotional baggage there.
If you're feeling some kind of
emotional or mental discomfort
in some way, if your life
isn't working like it should.
If you keep picking the wrong
kind of person as a mate
over and over, and you
can't figure out why.
If you tend to feel certain
emotions that you don't really
understand, you're
not sure where
they're coming from, if some
things easily trigger you.
OK?
And you can become upset
at the drop of a hat,
or you find yourself
crying for no reason.
Or if you are not able to
keep enough money in your bank
account.
Or if you just can't seem to
find love, and you're alone.
Those are all signs
of emotional baggage.
>> I started working
on the core piece,
which was like why am I getting
up in the middle of the night
and smashing a window, and
all the trauma and fear
that's running through my
body when that's taking place.
And as I started to
use tapping on it,
the memory started to come.
And it was the very first
time I actually got my memory
back around what happened.
And probably for
about six months
I did continual work on that
and pulled out so many layers.
And more and more
memories kept unfolding.
And more and more love was
brought to those memories.
And all of the fear that
was trapped in my system
started to dissolve.
And those reactions that I would
have in the middle of the night
stopped.
And I became more
peaceful inside.
>> There's so much anger
and judgment present when
the trauma has not
been addressed.
So they're not ready
to even entertain
the idea of why their father did
what they did, or their mother
did what they did.
But when they can start to heal
the trauma within themselves
separated from the
individual, and they
can start moving through
some of the stories,
they can start integrating the
rest of us and living with it.
And seeing that
there is an upside.
I mean, that is a very, very,
very, very sensitive subject
when you present the idea that
perhaps some goodness came
from the trauma that
you've experienced.
And people have to
be ready to hear that
and ready to receive that.
And then they're open.
When they start to see there's
something good in this,
there's a learning in this.
There's an awareness in this.
Then they're ready to go back to
the father they haven't spoken
in 10 years, the mother
they have ostracized out
of their life, and even the
ones that have passed away
and to create healing there.
>> When you take that power
back, and when you say,
I can let go of that thing
that happened 10 years ago.
And that's what's crazy
about limiting beliefs,
our lives, our body, trauma.
We're not walking around with
what happened this morning
only.
We're walking around with what
happened yesterday and the day
before and really, in the
decades since that have
made us the people who we are.
This whole mind-body
concept, right?
It's like, whoa,
mind-body, it's so new.
But it's pretty ridiculous
if you think about it, right?
That we have cut off
ourselves at the head,
and we're like, OK,
there's the head,
the things that we think about.
And then there's the body.
>> Well, if you think about it,
we have this conscious mind,
which is where we spend
all of our waking hours.
The subconscious mind
is the other part of us,
this vastly
intelligent part of us,
that is so smart that it
can take the sandwich you
had for lunch and can
convert some of that
over into new cardiac muscle
tissue or new nerve cells.
I mean, it's a level of
intelligence beyond our ability
to really comprehend at
this point where we are.
So the conscious mind
is a tiny, tiny part
of your total intelligence.
Now, they say that a
single cell in the body
is equivalent in complexity to
a full size aircraft carrier
with thousands of people working
onboard at their different jobs
with jets on the ramp
with their engines
pulled up, ready to take off.
That's a single cell.
And the last estimate was
that the average adult has
about 137 trillion of those.
Let me tell you something--
your subconscious mind is
aware of every single one of
those, down to the DNA level,
down to the quantum level.
And so every face you've ever
seen in the crowd, everything
you've ever eaten or tasted
or touched or smelled,
the whole history of
your health or disease
it's all in there in
that subconscious mind.
So consciously, we are
barely functional, I think.
We like to think of
ourselves as really smart,
but the subconscious
mind puts us all
to shame because it
is so intelligent.
Now, the problem is, you
see, the conscious mind
and the subconscious mind need
to agree on certain things.
For example, let's say
that you would like
to become wealthy, all right?
Well, that's fine.
Consciously you want
to become wealthy.
And so you want to
move in that direction.
But if your
subconscious mind has
learned from the things
that have come in
as inputs that it's not
OK for you to be wealthy,
what will happen is
the subconscious mind
will prevent that.
Or you may become wealthy,
and then lose that wealth
and have to regain
it over and over.
And this applies to everything.
We actually had
this case once where
there was a woman who was
trying to lose weight.
She was very overweight.
And what had happened
was we finally
were able to understand
was that she had seen
what happened with her mother.
Her mother, when she was
a child, was overweight.
Went on a diet, lost the
weight, promptly had an affair,
and destroyed the family,
ended up in divorce.
Terribly painful.
So here's this child now,
who's in her 40s and 50s,
trying to lose weight and
can't because the subconscious
mind has this idea
that if we lose weight,
we'll have an affair.
And our marriage will end.
And that'll be the end of it.
And so she was never able to
get to that point, you see?
And so that emotional
baggage will run us.
>> There's a very famous
study called the ACE Study,
Adverse Childhood Experiences.
Massive number of people looking
at what happened in childhood.
And there's an ACE
score, so you can
go through different
traumatic experiences.
And you add them up.
And for the people who have the
highest traumatic experiences
score, they get one score.
And if not many things
happen to you in childhood,
you get another score.
Now, here's what's crazy about
these this study in particular,
and it's been repeated
since then, smoking, cancer,
addiction, directly correlated
with adverse childhood
experiences.
So you think to yourself,
what does cancer--
something happened
to you in childhood,
and now you're more likely, it's
not like the only determinant,
but you're more likely to get
cancer statistically because
of these experiences.
And I think what's happening
in the body, when we think
about especially those
tough experiences,
the environment is unsafe.
I think about the word safety.
I use it a lot in tapping.
Even though I don't feel safe.
And most people don't
think about that.
They don't walk around
going do I feel safe or not.
But if I ask people,
especially who
have been traumatized
in deep ways,
do you feel safe in your body?
They answer, no.
When they tune in, they go,
and you can do it at home
right now, you can
close your eyes and go,
do I feel safe in my body?
And what that's going to
open you up to is what
are the parts of you
that have been running
with that traumatic event,
that have felt anxious,
that have gripped tight.
Right?
Because this is what happens
when trauma is created,
the body goes, uh.
And all too often,
it doesn't let go.
And I tell people, if we think
about that holding on tight,
if I close my fist
right now, and I
say, OK, I'm going to
squeeze it for five minutes.
Right?
Five minutes later, this
is going to start to hurt.
And if I go, well,
you know what,
I'm going to squeeze
it for two hours.
Now, this is getting
uncomfortable.
And it's going to be really
uncomfortable when I open it.
Now, imagine squeezing
like this for a decade.
What would happen?
I mean, I wouldn't be able
to open my hand, right?
It would probably
get all crippled.
Blood flow would be affected.
The growth would be affected.
If this happened
when I was young,
who knows how the
fingers actually grow?
Maybe they stop growing because
they're stuck in this place.
I think that's what happens
to us emotionally when we have
these traumatic experiences.
We're holding on so tight,
and we're walking around
with this belief about the world
that we got to keep gripping.
You got to stay safe.
You can't be open
and vulnerable.
And that affects the
rest of our lives.
So then when we-- you talked
about finding in our 20s, 30s,
40s, whenever it is,
finding that we've
been gripping like this,
it's a little uncomfortable
to begin to open that up.
It can feel unsafe.
It can be painful.
They'll go, I don't
want to look there,
which is why it's great to have
every tool at your disposal--
tapping, the right practitioner,
or the right therapist,
especially if it's that
deep traumatic stuff.
All these new tools
and techniques
to begin to unfold that.
To begin to open up that
hand to allow the body
to feel that it's safe.
>> Now, when you're
trapped in negative belief
and you're trying to build
positive neural capacity
and new beliefs, it's hard
because your brain is used
to functioning in those ways.
We know from the work of Nobel
Prize winning Professor Eric
Kandel that if you pass a
signal through a neural bundle
repeatedly for an hour,
the number of synapses
can double in an hour.
And so what if
you've been passing
angry thoughts and
resentful thoughts
or guilty thoughts
or shameful thoughts
through those circuits for
years and years and years?
You now have massive
neural bundles dedicated
to sending those signals.
And now, you think, gee, you
know, I'm a miserable person.
I'm horrible to my kids.
I'm miserable in my job.
I keep on having
financial disasters.
I'll go take a weekend
workshop at the Dawson Church,
you know, Deepak Chopra
or someone like that.
And so they go to a Tony
Robbins workshop or Joe Dispenza
workshop or Marianne
Williamson workshop.
And now, you feel great
after the workshop.
You're in this temporary
state of euphoria.
You feel so good.
But then Monday morning, you're
back in your regular life
with all the
stimuli that trigger
the firing of those neural
bundles, which have been
building for the last 30 years.
And you revert right
back to the way you are.
So that's the challenge
of personal growth.
We have to build that
signaling capacity.
We have to build that belief.
We have to build those
positive circuits,
even before we have
the experience of them.
>> People only know
what they know.
So if you're born into a
family that doesn't love,
then that's what
you think love is.
And so you look for that
because it's comfortable,
and it's what you know.
You don't even know that
a whole new level of love
is available out there.
And so you attract people
based on what you expect
and what you grew up
with a lot of the time.
It's often very hard
for someone that
grew up with punishment or abuse
to even recognize that there's
something better out there.
They may, like, on
the surface know,
but on a subconscious
level, as a child,
especially between the
ages of zero and seven,
you're looking at your reality.
You're looking at your
parents, the people that
taught you as like gospel.
And that sets up the pathways
to this is what reality is.
And this is what
you should expect.
And this is normal.
And later on, you still
have those patterns,
so you're looking for that.
You attract that.
And then things
get really hectic.
And you might say, wow, this
isn't really helping me,
but I keep attracting these
types of people into my life.
And then, hopefully, you have
some type of support around you
that can help guide you to
understand that there's so much
more out there, so much
more available, so much more
love and caringness that
can come into your life,
even though you've
never experienced it.
>> Some people love yoga.
Some people prefer
Qigong or Tai Chi.
Some might prefer
martial arts or dance.
So same thing with therapy.
Some people respond really well
to cognitive therapies, others
energy therapies,
others hypnotherapy.
So you want to play around with
this whole beautiful bundle
of possibilities.
And then find the one
that works for you.
Like someone said to
me once, Tommy Dawson,
you've done all this research.
You've looked all these
different therapies.
Which is the best therapy?
I said, OK, I'll tell
you the best therapy.
The best therapy is the
one that works for you.
Another time someone
said to me, what's
the very best form
of meditation?
I said, the best
form of meditation
is the one you'll do every day.
So play around in all
these different techniques.
And then pick the one that
resonates with your energy
system, with your psyche, with
your history, with your body.
>> My beautiful 90-year-old
psychologist and the best
teacher I've ever had when I've
been going for the toughest
times said to me, you have
to feel it to heal it.
And I think there's
real mastery in that.
In honoring the
feeling of the pain
rather than covering it with
drugs or alcohol or behavior
that may not serve you
or that you may regret.
It's really important to
acknowledge that feeling it
is actually a faster track
way to get through it.
Don't hide from it.
Find a way to work
through it and acknowledge
that sometimes it's so bad
you got nothing but tears.
>> The amount of energy it takes
to hide and suppress any type
of trauma is staggering.
And we're living with
it every single day
that we don't even know.
And I believe that the cost,
the short-term discomfort,
if you want to call
it that, of addressing
a trauma, such as sexual abuse,
physical abuse, mental abuse
that you experienced as a
child, the short-term discomfort
it's the tip of the iceberg
when it comes to living
with that every single day.
Because, again, your
soul is depressed.
Your spirit is squashed.
You don't get to amplify
you don't get to show up.
You don't get to share
all of who you are.
And if you think for a moment
that by me hiding my trauma,
by me not talking about it,
I'm protecting everybody else.
You're living in a cloud.
You're living on Mars.
Because your kids are feeling it
energetically every single day.
They're not sitting
there going, why
is mom not as alive as
my friend Albert's mom.
Where's the spark in her face?
By holding on to trauma,
you're passing it
on to the next generation,
energetically, spiritually.
And I know you think you're
doing a good job suppressing
it, but you're not.
You're doing a shitty job
suppressing it because it's
taking way too much energy.
And that energy could be
expelled in so many other ways.
Because when you hide
your negative emotion,
you hide trauma, you hide
your gift in there with it.
You put it in a box
and you lock it away.
And I believe our greatest gift
lies right next to our deepest
wounds.
>> On December 14, 2012, that
day started out like any other.
Getting the boys
ready for school.
And I was getting
ready for work.
I remember walking Jesse
out to meet his dad.
I remember turning around
and giving Jesse a hug.
I noticed that he had
written in the frost
with his little
fingernail I love you.
That happened to be
his last picture.
And also, my goodbye message.
I left for work,
about 45 minutes away.
Shortly after I
arrived at work, people
started coming up to
my desk and telling me
that there had been a shooting.
>> We do have the breaking news
of a shooting at an elementary
school in Newtown, Connecticut.
>> I need units in the
school I got bodies here.
>> An angry young man shot his
way through the glass doors
of Sandy Hook Elementary
and proceeded to gun down 20
first-graders in two first grade
classrooms and six teachers
and administrators in one of
the worst mass shootings in US
history.
>> I heard that children
were taken out bloody.
>> I'm very scared,
worried about my son.
Worried about the other
kids that I know here.
>> It was terrifying.
I'm still terrified.
I think I'm still in
shock about it all.
I still don't know
everything that happened.
>> It's a very, very difficult
scene for the family members,
for all the responding
first responders.
It's a tragedy.
It's a tragic scene.
>> My son, Jesse Lewis, attended
that school and was in one
of those classrooms.
All the children
had been evacuated,
and that the parents
were supposed to meet up
with them at the firehouse.
So I drove the 45 minutes with
my phone dinging, ringing.
I really got concerned,
really concerned.
I was looking for my
little brown headed boy
and not finding him.
Neil, his father, is looking.
And we're texting
back and forth.
Have you checked here?
Have you checked there?
We couldn't find him.
And finally, Neil left to go
check the hospitals because all
of the lines were busy.
And I finally went
into that back room.
I put his name down on a
list at the very bottom.
And I remember, I mean, I didn't
think ever in a million years
that all those people were dead.
>> Once the information was in,
it was clear to me that I had
to do something.
I'm in town.
This is 10 minutes
from my house.
I know this technique
that can help
mitigate some of the trauma
that can help people heal.
Looking around
knowing that tapping
is a great technique for
trauma, I was compelled to help.
My brother Alex and my
sister Jessica and I
and the rest of the family
formed the Tapping Solution
Foundation right then
for that specific purpose
of helping and healing.
We flew in Dr. Lori
Leyden from California
who had had a lot of experience
working in Rwanda with genocide
survivors, working on trauma
and tapping with them.
And she ended up
moving to Connecticut.
Spent the next couple
of years supported
by the foundation in town
working with people again
and again and again.
And we collaboratively
we did that.
We worked together.
Ran workshops.
Worked with people individually.
Some amazing stories of
healing and transformation.
Scarlett Lewis, who has
since become a dear friend.
Rainy, foggy, Tuesday night.
The shooting was on Friday.
But I remember walking
into Scarlett's house.
Scarlett was there.
Her remaining son JT, who
was 12 or 13 at the time.
And she was-- traumatized
doesn't describe
the state that she was in.
>> I felt like I was attached
to the shooter with an umbilical
cord.
And it ran out of my
side and into his.
And all of my personal
power drained out
of me in the form of
anger through this cord
and into the shooter.
>> She had heard about tapping,
had done some Tapping World
Summit, but hadn't gone deep.
And that night, we
tapped together.
Now, people often ask about
these situations like, well,
this happened on Friday.
And what did you do on Tuesday?
Like, how are you
going to tap this away?
Because we're always like,
oh, tap away the anxiety.
Tap away the anger.
We didn't tap anything away.
In that moment, I just looked
to bring her some peace
and to bring her body
into a state of calm.
And what was interesting
about that experience
is we actually tapped
on something else
completely different.
It wasn't like on a Tuesday
after her six-year-old son dies
on Friday I'm going to say let's
tap on even though Jesse died.
We tapped on anger
and frustration.
Other things that were
going on in her life
that were then feeding into
the stress and the anxiety.
So my job in that
moment was, what
can I do to just bring
a semblance of peace
to this suffering individual?
>> EFT stands for emotional
freedom techniques.
It's also called tapping.
It has you think about
something that bothers you.
Now, when you think about
a thing that bothers you,
you're activating all the
circuits in your brain
that carry that information.
So you then have your brain
working in a certain way.
You have certain
circuits lit up.
If you think about
things that bother you
over and over and
over again, you
make those circuits bigger
and bigger and bigger.
But if you interrupt that
pattern with something else,
then you are able to
break that signaling.
And then your brain no
longer uses that circuit.
And the something else in the
case of EFT is acupressure.
There are over 300 meridian
points of the body.
They're organized into
14 meridian lines.
And EFT has you apply
acupressure in the form
of a fingertip tapping,
like this, to about 13
of those points.
There are seven in the
brief form of EFT and 13
in the long form of the FT, as
well as using eye movements.
And what we see in
people's EEGs and MRIs when
they do this is that
your first have them
think about the problem.
When they think about the
problem about the event
in their life, about the bomb
blast, about the car crash,
about the terrible divorce,
whatever it might be,
you find the emotional
brain is all lit up.
In an MRI or an EEG, you
see all this activity
in the emotional midbrain.
When people start tapping,
it sends a second signal
to the brain of safety.
Because if you're being
chased by a tiger,
you would not be tapping.
So now, the brain's
getting two inputs.
It's getting this signal
from your memory saying,
be stressed, be stressed,
danger, danger, danger, danger.
And sending a second single,
a somatic signal of soothing
in the form of tapping.
And it prioritizes that soothing
signal just the way your mom,
when you were crying as a baby,
she would stroke your face.
She would stroke your head.
She would touch you.
Our emotional middle
brains understand touch.
When a friend of
yours is crying,
you don't explain to them why
they shouldn't feel so bad.
You put your arm around them,
and touch will soothe them.
There was a famous psychiatrist
called Joseph Wolpe.
After World War
II, he was working
with veterans of World War II.
And these men, for the most
part men, had shell shock.
They were dreadfully
affected by the war.
And he was a good
Freudian therapist.
So he laid them on a couch
to do the talking cure.
And said tell me
about Omaha Beach.
And he came to the
realization after doing this
with those soldiers, he
said, that kind of therapy
is not ineffective.
It's harmful.
And a later term is
re-traumatizing to remember
the bad stuff, to remember
the Pit Bull attack,
remember the car accident,
remember your buddies being
blown to bits on the beach.
By replaying that in your mind,
that thought, now stimulating
that emotion is actually
re-traumatizing you.
And as you fire those neural
circuits in your brain,
they wire together bigger
and bigger and bigger.
So we find, for example,
that stress circuits,
like the amygdala,
grow in people who have
been traumatized in that way.
And learning and
memory circuits,
like those in the hippocampus,
actually shrink over time.
So we're doing brain
remodeling with our thoughts.
Our thoughts aren't just
producing some kind of emotion
or experience in our minds.
They're producing neural
tissue in our brains.
And if you start to
use that neural tissue
over and over and over again,
then it becomes hard to change.
So you can't use
cognitive techniques
for developmental trauma
or preverbal trauma.
You need energy techniques.
And we have huge
numbers of them.
We have acupuncture, which
affects the flows of energy
in the body's meridians.
We have acupressure,
like EFT, where
you interrupt that thought and
that experience with pressure
or tapping on a point.
We have energy medicine,
energy psychology techniques.
And these work below
the level of thought.
They work at the level of
the body's energy system.
What we see, for example,
on MRI or EEG scans,
is massive shifts in the
body's usage of energy.
As you shift the energy of the
body, then the form of the body
shifts as well.
>> Walking back out through
the kitchen and out through
the front door, when I noticed
on our kitchen chalkboard that
Jesse had written a message
sometime shortly before he
died.
He wrote three words--
nurturing, healing, love.
And I knew that I
would be spending
the rest of my life spreading
this message of nurturing
healing love.
>> She has also locked
into a bigger mission.
And that's what's really
exciting about the work
that she's doing is that she's
creating meaning behind that.
>> Afterwards, JT and I started
making our own gratitude list
and realizing that we really did
have a lot to be grateful for.
We both talked about the
importance of forgiving.
Forgiveness, for me, was
a big set of scissors.
I cut that cord that
attached me to pain.
And literally,
almost immediately,
all my personal power
flowed back into me.
And it was such a relief.
>> It's true for her.
Like, the way she speaks of
it, it is true forgiveness.
Like, she forgave the man
murdered her six-year-old son
in cold blood along
with 19 other children.
And she didn't just
say I forgive him.
She did it.
You just, you know there's
that essence of forgiveness
in a way that is hard to fathom.
>> Jesse had really guided
my direction following
the shooting with his
chalkboard message.
And I also knew
that if Adam Lanza
had been able to give and
receive nurturing healing love,
that the tragedy would
never have happened.
Because I knew that
somebody who could
have done something so
horrible must have been
in a tremendous amount of pain.
>> His Holiness, the Dalai
Lama, people say, you know,
who's your greatest teacher?
And as the spokesperson
for Buddhism in the West,
the answer has to be the
Buddha is my greatest teacher.
And what does he say?
The Chinese who bludgeoned
with ax handles 2 million
of his followers, right?
And that's his greatest teacher.
So for me, owning your life
means reframing it to say,
OK, I'm here today.
I'm safe.
Yes, I have this
kind of relationship
with my parents or this person,
or this was humiliating.
But instead of fighting
reality, a reality
that you can't
change, the sooner
you own it is the
sooner you'll let
go of all those resentments.
And those resentments are now--
the adage from the 12-step
program, resentment
is like poking
yourself in the eye
and waiting for your
parents to go blind.
You're only poisoning yourself.
So you have to forgive
all these people.
>> Forgiveness is
critically important.
And we often forget
about forgiveness.
But I think that you can't
really have peace in your life
if there's someone that you have
not forgiven because it creates
an energy blockage.
You see?
And so energy can't
flow if you're
stopping that forgiveness.
Now, it may be that
you need to forgive
you, yourself, for something.
I mean, we all do stupid things.
But forgiveness is possible.
And one of the things we found
is that sometimes people who
cannot forgive someone
who's really wronged them,
find that when they remove
the emotional baggage around
the event or around the person,
they are able to move to that
point where they can
forgive and move on.
>> Forgiveness is a wonderful
gift to give to somebody else.
But forgiveness is probably
one of the greatest
gifts you can give to yourself.
If you're holding a
grudge to somebody else,
you're paying the
price every single day.
>> The other thing you need
to realize is that you have
emotional baggage.
Sorry, but you do.
And so you need to start
getting rid of that baggage.
>> One of the studies in
my book "Minds Matter"
compares the lifespan of
optimists versus pessimists.
People have a cheery and
positive frame for their lives.
They had all the same
problems as other people.
They may have been
fired from their job.
They may have had
a financial crash.
But they have an optimistic
take on the world.
It compares their
lifespan to pessimists.
And the difference in
lifespan is eight years.
Those optimists live eight
years longer than pessimists.
And those aren't
eight years spent
on a respirator
in a nursing home.
Those are eight
healthy years as well.
>> It's also important to
realize that our emotions that
come up for us are messengers
from the subconscious.
But that we also
have the opportunity
to experience
whatever's coming up,
but then change that
into a different emotion,
a positive emotion.
Then there's a whole
palette of positive emotions
that we can choose from.
>> Personal growth and
psychology have been making
a fundamental error
for a century.
And that is we measure
how sick people are.
So if I go into a
psychologist with anxiety,
they'll measure
my anxiety level.
And if my treatment's
successful,
I'll have zero anxiety
at the end of it.
So we're measuring
depression, anxiety, and pain.
And the goal is zero.
But we don't want zero.
We don't want to
just have no pain
and no anxiety no depression.
We want to have vibrant health.
We want ecstasy every day.
The new science of personal
growth, the new human potential
is what's above zero.
And how high above
zero can we go?
And the answer is
way above zero.
We can achieve ecstatic states
in meditation and by tapping
and reducing our stress.
So ask yourself this
question, who would you
be if you didn't
have your own story?
If you were free of all the
things that hold you back.
You could soar.
There's evidence showing
that we human beings
have remarkable capacities.
And we're just beginning
to exercise them.
>> I always say moment by
moment, breath by breath,
day by day.
I've got this.
And even in the
moments I haven't, I
will then remind myself I
just got through that moment.
So in fact, I have.
I'm still here.
You are still here.
You have gone through the
worst moments in your life.
You're still here.
Therefore, in
hindsight, when we look
back at those times that have
been really challenging, I
would almost suggest
that anything that's
been challenging to you in your
life that you look back on,
when you look back
on it with hindsight,
you could almost say,
yes, it was a gift.
Or it is because of
that I have actually
created this in my life,
or I've become that,
or I have met this person,
or I have studied there.
There is a gift in
every challenge.
It's just whether or
not we're willing to be
open to having the
perception that we
deserve the truth
and the pathway
to finding that
new way of being.
I can tell you it is
through the powerful mastery
of our spiritual leaders that
they will also say that that
as part of the pathway.
Struggle is the pathway to self,
to god, to universe, to source.
[MUSIC PLAYING]